---
layout: post
uid: 449255822
title: Back from Europe
date: 2014-03-27 10:17:02 -0700
permalink: /posts/449255822
---

I thought I had made an announcement on my blog, but apparently not. I just
recently returned from a two-month trip around Europe. It was what you might
call a "soul searching" adventure. After being fairly unhappy with many of my
previous jobs and employers, I decided to get away from programming and my
regular life for a bit. I wanted to know how people in other parts of the world
lived. I came to a fairly shocking conclusion: not that much differently.

My travels took me to Spain, France, Belgium, Germany, Switzerland, Czech
Republic, Austria, and Italy. A lot of countries, a handful of cities within
each, and many different styles of living. But the one thing that interested me
most, which I was able to view because it was the off-season, was how average
life was in most places. In fact, it was almost disappointing - if I had been
there for a more fanciful reason I may indeed have been disappointed. However,
even though life seemed average, it was also definitely not on par with the
quality of life I experience here in the USA, and specifically in California.

In most countries we went to the goods and services offered were over-priced and
the amenities were less than what could be considered average in California. For
example, in France we were paying around &euro;20 to wash and dry our clothes -
a single wash cycle and a single 40-minute dry cycle. That's well over USD
$25. The Internet was also quite miserable in many places we went. Surprisingly
to me, Switzerland and Czech Republic had the best Internet connections. Later I
went to [Akamai](http://www.akamai.com/stateoftheinternet/) and found out this
is because only four countries in the EU place in the top 10 rank for "best
Internet", which is a combination of highest average speeds and reliability. Of
the places we visited, Czech Republic was the only EU member country to be in
the top 10 rank. USA placed toward the bottom of the top 10 ranks, but it did
explain to me why California, and the USA in general, seemed to have such better
Internet than the rest of Europe: because it does.

Aside from being over-priced and lacking in proper Internet, I also noticed that
everything was still very "old" in Europe. Most countries we went to have a
large majority of their economy supported by tourism, which means it is
imperative for places to keep their older features in decent repair, even when
tearing down the past to renovate for the future would be more prosperous to
the people living in the area. In fact, we learned that Bruges, Belgium, is over
90% supported by tourism. That means that if tourism died in Bruges, the city
would fall into economic ruin. How crazy is it to think that you live in a place
where your residents don't build anything, they don't grow anything, they don't
export anything - they just supply a demand for tourism. To me, it's an
inconceivable thought.

Being back in California I can say, with some certainty, that we are indeed on
the forefront of the future. California wines are starting to become worldwide
winners for taste and quality. California also has Silicon Valley, still
considered a major player, if not the top player, in technology advancement and
innovation. The entertainment capitol of the world is here: Hollywood. The
population of California would also make it the fourth largest country in the
world, if it were to secede from the rest of the USA. We also have some of the
widest variety of industries in a single States, making California one of the
States least dependent on imports in the country.

This isn't to say I dislike other places around the world. I loved my time in
both the Czech Republic and in Switzerland (the places with the best Internet,
no wonder). There are places I wouldn't mind going back to just for visiting,
like Granada, Spain. But I definitely can't envision myself being happy living
or working anywhere that isn't California, or at least the USA. And now that I
am better traveled than I once was, I can say without any blind patriotism that
I honestly love California, and I can't wait until we bid our current overlords
farewell and welcome in an era of the United States of California.
