---
layout: post
uid: 465534322
title: "Development - Part 1: Communication"
date: 2014-10-01 20:05:22 -0700
permalink: /posts/465534322
---

I did a post a short while back on meetings and what does/doesn't work. Well,
I'm realizing that the entire development process is constantly being messed
up. Most managers don't know what it means to manage their team. Most top-level
figures in a company - more noticeable the smaller the company is - don't
understand how to direct their team to develop a product efficiently. In fact,
many people unknowingly sabotage their product/company by making common and
easily-avoided mistakes. So I'm going to write a mutli-part blog series on the
development process and how to make it more efficient.

The first thing we're talking about is the most core concept in any development
effort: communication. How to communicate effectively between team members and
various "levels" of the hierarchy (e.g. developer to manager) is a critical
component for a successful development process. This part will discuss the tools
and concepts required for effective team communication.

## The Team: Who and Where

I'm going to use the word "sub-team" to mean a subset of the full development
team that is focused on a particular type of task, i.e. art, server code, client
code, marketing, etc. The word "team" means "everyone involved in the
development process."

The first thing to do when considering tools and processes is who your team is
composed of and where they are working. I like to assume that remote workers
(such as contractors) will be present and plan my tool and processes around that
assumption. Many people do not do this and end of shooting themselves in the
foot when suddenly they have a remote worker added to the team dynamic. This is
because having a bunch of in-person communication will lessen the use of other
methods, such as email. Then you **will** run into a situation where people are
not effectively communicating with your remote worker. So let's roll with the
assumption that you have one or more remote workers on your team. It is always
the safest assumption to make, and the outcome works well even with teams that
are purely local.

**NOTE**: I hear from many people that it is always better to communicate
in-person or face-to-face. This is simply not true. Each individual differs in
how they effectively communicate. An extreme introvert, for example, will want
fewer meetings and prefer a mostly asynchronous means of communication, such as
email. Because everyone is different, it is important to have as many methods of
communication as possible available to the team, but to ensure the least
intrusive methods are the ones used first.

## Tools

Going with the assumption that our team will have remote workers (this also
allows us to plan for workers that are out-of-office but available to work from
a laptop, for example), we want digital and asynchronous communication to become
our number one method of team communication. Digital because, well, unless
you've built a reliable and safe teleportation system then it's going to be
digital. Asynchronous because you don't want to spend precious time considering
which time zone everyone is in or what every persons personal schedule
is. Thankfully there is a system that handles just such a method of
communication which already exists, almost everyone uses, and is free:
email. However, there are some new players to consider as well. Ones which allow
for real-time communication but also store messages and allow for asynchronous
responses. [HipChat](https://www.hipchat.com/) and
[CampFire](https://campfirenow.com/) are great services that provide such a
service.

Email should never be ignored. Even if you use a service such as HipChat, there
should always be email communication. Every smart phone can receive emails,
every computer with a web browser can access email, and almost everyone has an
email account. It's the most reliable and surefire means of digital,
asynchronous communication. Because of this, I would recommend using another
service as your "first ping" method (e.g. HipChat) and then email as your
"followup" method. If you don't receive a response using your dedicated tool,
send an email out. If you have something extremely important, maybe you need to
physically call the person if you don't receive a response. Whatever it may be,
though, use your dedicated tool for the first ping and then move on to an
appropriate followup.

## Create a Process, Follow It

It's important to build habits, so make sure that even your local workers are
sticking to whatever communication process you have set up for your tools. This
will keep you from having to remind people to talk in a chat room or send out
important emails about something discussed in-person just moments prior. Another
good point of following the process is that, using digital communication first,
it allows a record to be made of a conversation or remark. Using tools with
"public" chat rooms also creates better transparency of discussions for certain
topics. People can chime in if they want, just keep tabs on the main points, or
ignore the conversation altogether. Following the process will bring in many
benefits with little downside.

## Proper Face-to-Face Communication

Do not simply jump on Google Hangouts or Skype and call someone up hoping to
enter a video chat with them. If you do not have a meeting scheduled with that
person, it is disrespectful and arrogant to believe that the other person is
just waiting for you to interrupt them with a video call. So don't do it. It's
the simple.

## Meeting Done Right

Although I have an entire blog post on proper meetings, I will just highlight
the major points here since it is an important topic of effective
communication.

Whenever you wish to speak with someone in-depth on any subject, even if it is
simply to brainstorm, you need to set up a meeting. That meeting must include an
agenda and any required reading/notes that will help the other attendees
prepare. The last thing you want is a meeting to start where no one really knows
what is being talked about or why. That leads to 30-60 minutes of people simply
getting to a place of understanding, and nothing productive will occur. If you
give people ample time to understand the meeting subject and prepare themselves,
the meeting will not only go by quicker but it will more often result in action
than pure discussion.
